Practicals 1-4 (#24)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course: episodes/practical4.Rmd

---
title: 'Understanding the Demons registration algorithm'
teaching: 10
exercises: 2
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

- How does the Demons registration algorithm achieve image registration?
- What parameters should be adjusted to optimise the performance of the Demons registration algorithm?
- What are the key strengths and potential limitations of using the Demons registration algorithm?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Explore the underlying principles and methods of the Demons registration algorithm.
- Understand the key parameters that influence the performance of the algorithm and how to tune them effectively.
- Visualise and interpret the results by generating plots of deformation fields and Jacobian determinant maps.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> In these exercises, we use three 2D sagittal MR slices *cine_MR_1.png*, *cine_MR_2.png*, and *cine_MR_3.png*, showing the lung, liver, and surrounding anatomy, at different points in time during free-breathing. Image 1 is at end-exhalation, image 2 at the end-inhalation for a normal breath, and image 3 at end-inhalation for a deep breath. You can find them in the zipped data folder under `practical4`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these exercises, we use three 2D sagittal MR slices `cine_MR_1.png`, `cine_MR_2.png`, and `cine_MR_3.png` showing the lung, liver, and surrounding anatomy, at different points in time during free-breathing. Image 1 is at end-exhalation, image 2 at the end-inhalation for a normal breath, and image 3 at end-inhalation for a deep breath. You can find them in the zipped data folder under `practical4`.
```

> This tutorial uses Python. There is a template Jupyter notebook for you to work on *practical4-exercises.ipynb*. You have also been provided with some utility functions in *utils.py*. When using a function from this file, you should read it and make sure you understand what it does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses Python. There is a template Jupyter notebook for you to work on `practical4-exercises.ipynb`. You have also been provided with some utility functions in `utils.py`. When using a function from this file, you should read it and make sure you understand what it does.
```

> There is also a function that implements the Demons registration algorithm in *demonsReg.py*. You should look at the code in *demonsReg.py* and check you can follow what it is doing. You should be able to understand what each section of code is doing, even if you don’t fully understand every line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also a function that implements the Demons registration algorithm in `demonsReg.py`. You should look at the code in `demonsReg.py` and check you can follow what it is doing. You should be able to understand what each section of code is doing, even if you don’t fully understand every line.
```

## 1. Loading and displaying images
Load and display the three images. Convert the images to doubles and reorientate them as in the previous exercises.

The images should look like this:

![Figure. Displayed images](fig/p4-displayed-images.png)

> Compare the images to each other and observe the motion that occurs between the images. Difference images (one image minus another, e.g. as shown below) are a good way seeing where there are differences between the images, but it can be difficult to tell how things have moved between the images from the difference image.

Reviewer: It would be helpful here to tell them that this is 1 minus 2 and 1 minus 3, rather than the other way around. Or you can let them know how you subtracted them and if they get a black area of liver rather than a bright white bit, then they did the subtraction in the opposite way - this is also fine.
Might be worth mentioning in the notebook too.

Author: see commit 28658bb

![Figure. Difference images](fig/p4-diff-images.png)

> It is often easier to appreciate how things have moved/changed between images if you 'flip' between the images. To achieve this, we can use the `dispImageFlip` function. This function takes in the two images you want to look at as arguments, and you can flip between the two using the arrow keys on your keyboard.

Reviewer: This is more a comment on diffImageFlip - since the variables in this notebook have some variation on image1 image2, and image 3 in the names, maybe it would be good to have the titles in this code be Image A and Image B instead of Image 1 and Image 2.

Author: modified dispImageFlip function in utils.py

See how the images differ from each other. Pay particular attention to motion that you think could be challenging for the demons algorithm to recover, such as very large motion and deformation, or sliding motion that can occur between the lung/liver and surrounding anatomy.

## 2. Demons algorithm
### 2.1. `demonsReg` function

> If you look at the comments at the start of `demonsReg` function in *demonsReg.py* (which are also displayed as the help info for the function) you will see that there are two required input parameters, the source and target images for the registration. There are also a number of optional input parameters, which have default values assigned to them that will be used if an alternative value is not specified. We will explore the effects of these parameters as we go through these exercises. The outputs of the function are the final warped image and the corresponding deformation field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have a look at the comments at the start of `demonsReg` function in `demonsReg.py` (which are also displayed as the help info for the function). There are two required input parameters: the **source** and **target** images for the registration. There are also a number of optional input parameters, which have default values assigned to them that will be used if an alternative value is not specified. We will explore the effects of these parameters as we go through these exercises. The outputs of the function are the final warped image and the corresponding deformation field.
```

Start by running a registration with `cine_MR_1` as the source image and `cine_MR_2` as the target image and using default values for all the other parameters.
When you start the registration, a figure appears with 3 subplots. The first subplot on the left shows the warped image (transformed source image), the second subplot in the middle shows the current deformation field and the third subplot on the right shows the update to the deformation field for the current iteration. The deformation field (middle plot) is displayed as a deformed grid whereas the update is displayed as a vector field. All three images update during the registration.

![Figure. Initialisation of the demons algorithm](fig/p4-reg-first-step.png)

> While the registration is running, you will notice that the figures are updated and that text is outputted in the notebook stating the current resolution level, iteration number, and value of the Mean Squared Difference (MSD) between the target image and the current warped image. At the end of the registration, the figure should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the registration is running, you will notice that the figures are updated and that text is outputted in the notebook stating the current resolution level, iteration number, and value of the Mean Squared Difference (MSD) between the target image and the current warped image. The MSD is the similarity metric used by this demons registration. At the end of the registration, the figure should look like this:
```

![Figure. Output of the demons algorithm](fig/p4-reg-output.png)

Here is a summary of the registration:
![Figure. Output of the demons algorithm](fig/registration_animation.gif)

At the end of the registration, a second figure appears. The figure allows us to flip between the source, target and warped image and shows the deformation field and difference image. We can also display the Jacobian (more details later).

![Figure. Output of the demons algorithm](fig/p4-reg-output2.png)

> If you look at the text output you will see that the final MSD value is 80.20 (rounded to 2 decimal places – more are shown in the console), and that 74 iterations were performed at the final (3rd) resolution level. If you scroll up in the console you will see that 24 iterations were also performed at the 2nd resolution level, and 17 iterations at the 1st level. If you look at the MSD value you will notice it decrease as the registration progresses, as would be expected, but that it increases between resolution levels. Do you know why it does this? Hint – it’s not just because there are more pixels in the higher resolution images, as using the mean rather than sum of squared differences should account for different numbers of pixels in the images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you look at the text output you will see that the final MSD value is 80.20 (rounded to 2 decimal places – more are shown in the console), and that 74 iterations were performed at the final (3rd) resolution level. If you scroll up in the console you will see that 24 iterations were also performed at the 2nd resolution level, and 17 iterations at the 1st level. 
:::::::::::::::challenge
Within each resolution level, the MSD value decreases with each iteration. However, the MSD increases between resolution levels. Do you know why it does this? 
::::::::::::::::hint
It’s not just because there are more pixels in the higher resolution images, as using the mean rather than sum of squared differences should account for different numbers of pixels in the images.
::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::
```

![Figure. Output of the demons algorithm](fig/registration_animation_fluid0.gif)

You will now see that the updates are much larger and noisier as no regularisation is being applied to them, but the deformation field is still relatively smooth as it does have regularisation applied. If you compare the result from this registration to the result obtained with the default parameters (remember, you can store the outputs of the function so that you can directly compare the results from different registrations) you will see that the results are very similar. However, the final MSD value is lower (72.73), but some regions of the deformation field are slightly less smooth. Which of the results should be considered ‘best’ will depend on exactly what the application is. But it should be clear that the elastic-like regularisation usually has a larger effect on the result than the fluid-like regularisation does. Now try running several more registrations with different levels of elastic-like and fluid-like regularisation to get a good feel for how the combination of these parameters affects the results, and which ranges of values produce good/bad results.

> Note – you can control how often the images update by setting the value of the `disp_freq` input parameter. The registrations themselves run relatively quickly, but updating the images takes some time. This makes the registrations run considerably slower but allows you to see how the deformation field and warped image change during the course of the registration, which can be very useful for understanding why the registration produces the result it does. If you set `disp_freq` to 0 then the images will only update at the start of each level and to show the final result. If you do this you will notice that the registration runs much quicker, but you miss all the details of how the registration produces the result. For most of these exercises I recommend keeping the `disp_freq` value relatively low, e.g. at the default value of 5 or less, so that you can see how the deformation field and warped image change as the registration is progressing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::::::::::::::::::::::callout
You can control how often the plots are updated by setting the value of the `disp_freq` input parameter. The registrations themselves run relatively quickly, but updating the images takes some time. This makes the registrations run considerably slower but allows you to see how the deformation field and warped image change during the course of the registration, which can be very useful for understanding why the registration produces the result it does. If you set `disp_freq` to 0 then the images will only update at the start of each level and to show the final result. If you do this you will notice that the registration runs much quicker, but you miss all the details of how the registration produces the result. For most of these exercises, keep the `disp_freq` value relatively low, e.g. at the default value of 5 iterations or less, so that you can see how the deformation field and warped image change as the registration is progressing.
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::
```

### 2.3. Resolution levels
You should have noticed that the registration is using a multi-resolution approach, with 3 resolution levels by default. You can specify the number of resolution levels to use with the `num_lev` input parameter. Try running a registration with `num_lev` set to 1, i.e. so that only a single resolution level is used, and the multi-resolution approach is not applied. At the end of the registration, the figures should look like this:

![Figure. Output of the demons algorithm](fig/p4-reg-output-numlev1.png)
![Figure. Output of the demons algorithm](fig/p4-reg-output2-numlev1.png)

Here is a summary of the registration:
![Figure. Output of the demons algorithm](fig/registration_animation_level1.gif)

> Do you think using a multi-resolution approach helps? Why?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::::::::::::::::::discussion
Do you think using a multi-resolution approach helps? Why?
:::::::::::::::::::::
```

> Now try running the registration with 6 resolution levels (if you use 7 levels the 1st level only contains 4 pixels and spends several iterations not really doing anything before moving on to the next level, and if you try and use more than 7 levels you will get an error as there are not enough pixels to down-sample the images that many times). You will notice that the final MSD = 86.24 is worse than when using the default 3 resolution levels (MSD = 80.20). However, if you compare the results of both registrations to the target image you will see that the registration with 6 levels appears to align the structures within the lung better than the result with 3 levels, but the structures outside the lung, e.g. the ribs, are not aligned as well. Again, which results should be considered best will depend on the exact application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now try running the registration with 6 resolution levels (if you use 7 levels then the first level only contains 4 pixels, so there is not very much to change and improve. Anything greater than 7 levels will result in an error, since no further down-sampling can be done). The final MSD with six levels is worse (MSD = 86.24 ) then with the default 3 resolution levels (MSD = 80.20). However, visually the results from six resolution levels appears to align the structures within the lung better than the result from using three levels. It is the structures outside the lung, e.g. the ribs, that are not aligned as well. Again, assessing the "best" registration will be dependent on the exact application.
```
I wonder if a few of these super coarse resolutions are worth showing, so peopel get a sense of the downsampling.

So which registration do you think is best?

### 2.6. Other parameters
As you will have seen, there are a number of other optional parameters that can be set. The parameters `disp_spacing`, `scale_update_for_display`, `disp_method_df`, and `disp_method_up` all effect how the deformation field and update are displayed but have no effect on the actual registration itself. The comments/help should explain how these parameters work.

The `max_it` parameter sets the maximum number of iterations to be performed. The default value is 1000, but you should have noticed that usually the registration stops well before reaching this number of iterations. This is because the registration checks for an improvement in the MSD at each iteration, and if there has not been an improvement it will move on to the next resolution level or finish if it is already on the last level. This behaviour can be disabled by setting the `check_MSD` parameter to false. In this case the registration will run for the full max_it number of iterations at each level.

> Try running a registration with the default parameters and `check_MSD = False`. I suggest also setting `disp_freq = 50` so that the registration does not take too long to run. By looking at the MSD values output to the console you will notice that some iterations now cause (small) increases to the MSD. You will also notice that the registration reaches a stage at each level where the result starts to ‘oscillate’, with a few iterations making minor increases to the MSD and then a few making minor decreases to the MSD, and barely any noticeable changes to the warped image or deformation field. The final MSD value is lower than when `check_MSD` was set to true (74.53 compared to 80.20), but at the expense of running many more iterations. We get a similar result (MSD = 75.21) by setting `max_it` to 500 and only running half as many iterations, indicating that for at least the last 500 iterations the result was mostly oscillating and not improving, but the problem is it is difficult to know how many iterations will be required before the results start to ‘oscillate’ as this will depend on both the images being registered and the other parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try running a registration with the default parameters and `check_MSD = False`. It is also recommended to set `disp_freq = 50` so that the registration does not take too long to run. By looking at the MSD values output to the console you will notice that some iterations now cause (small) increases to the MSD. You will also notice that the registration reaches a stage at each level where the result starts to ‘oscillate’, with a few iterations making minor increases to the MSD and then a few making minor decreases to the MSD, and barely any noticeable changes to the warped image or deformation field. The final MSD value is lower than when `check_MSD` was set to true (74.53 compared to 80.20), but at the expense of running many more iterations. We get a similar result (MSD = 75.21) by setting `max_it` to 500 and only running half as many iterations, indicating that for at least the last 500 iterations the result was mostly oscillating and not improving, but the problem is it is difficult to know how many iterations will be required before the results start to ‘oscillate’ as this will depend on both the images being registered and the other parameters.
```
